---
layout: post
title: "Simulated Annealing Algorithm for Graph Coloring"
byline: "Köse et al"
arxiv: "1712.00709"
tags:
    - graphs
    - color
    - coloring-problem
    - traversal
    - graph-theory
    - simulated-annealing
summary: Using the Metropolis Algorithm Monte Carlo, a simulated annealing approach, it is possible to generate very good graph-colorings for arbitrarily large graphs.
---

One common problem in graph theory is the task known as "graph coloring": Given $m$ colors, find a way to color parts of a graph — namely, vertices or edges — such that no two neighbors share a color, or "label." This is simple on small graphs, but the complexity of this challenge grows quickly with the size of a graph. This challenge is even harder if — as is very common — you don't know the value of $m$.

If it is possible to find a coloring of the vertices of a graph such that no two neighboring vertices are the same color, the graph has "proper coloring." There can be many different proper colorings for the same graph.

_Simulated annealing_ is an algorithm that randomly — non-monotonically — approaches an ideal solution. I often envision it as a semi-evolutionary process (and indeed SA is commonly used for genetic algorithm simulations) where genes are randomly changed to approach a local maximum, but just as easily a mutation may occur that is not at all to the advantage of the loss-function.

Here, just as it is most often used, SA generates a _very good_ solution, but it is not guaranteed to produce a perfect or ideal solution (a "proper coloring"). So it goes; there is as of yet no deterministic, guaranteed way to practically find an ideal graph coloring for arbitrarily large graphs.

In short, the _Metropolis Algorithm Monte Carlo_ used in this paper randomly changes a color in the graph; if it makes the graph coloring better, assign it a high probability of staying the same. If it makes the graph coloring worse assign it a lower probability of staying the same.

In this way, the graph slowly converges on a very good (but not perfect) vertex coloring.

This sort of work is useful for a number of modern challenges: Graph coloring is a problem familiar to many people responsible for resource distribution (either in the real world or in digital terms), seating plans, sports competition scheduling, and more.
