---
layout: post
title: "Senenmut: an ancient Egyptian astronomer"
byline: "Bojan Novaković"
arxiv: "0801.1331"
tags:
    - egypt
    - astronomy
    - history
    - hatshepsut
summary: Much can be learned about the astronomical findings of Senenmut, a friend and royal timekeeper-advisor to Pharaoh Hatshepsut, from the inscriptions on the ceiling of his tomb.
---

Novaković summarizes some findings about Senenmut, an astronomer during the rein of Pharaoh Hatshepsut. The 365-day, 12-month year used by Egypt at this time was based on the cyclical appearance of the star Sirius, which coincided with the flooding of the Nile. This timekeeping led to Egyptian astronomy playing a stronger role in Egyptian culture. A least 43 constellations (some of which were used to time-keep) were recognized by the 13th century BC, and ancient Egyptians had characterized the heliocentric planetary motion of Mercury, Mars, and Venus. Perhaps more widely known is the way star positions were used to angle the pyramids true-north.

Senenmut, a non-royal-born vizier to the queen-Pharaoh Hatshepsut, also played the role of calendar registrar, architect, tutor to the queen's daughter, and many other roles. Most important to this paper, he was a royal astronomer. (Much of this is known from his tombs, the ceilings of which were decorated in astronomical tables and diagrams.)

Based on the configuration of the planets in this diagram — Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury, and Venus, with Mars in retrograde — modern astronomers pinpointed the date of inscription to 1534 BC.

**But here's the catch:** Senenmut was known to have advised Hatshepsut and mentored her daughter during Hatshepsut's reign, which is generally placed between 1479–1458 BC.

So one interesting question is to explore whether this tomb inscription describes an occurrence that took place during the lifetime and employ of Senenmut, and if so, how this can better inform the chronology of other events in ancient Egypt.
