---
layout: post
title: "HOLA: Human-like Orthogonal Network Layout"
byline: Kieffer et al
doi: "10.1109/TVCG.2015.2467451"
tags:
    - graphs
    - visualization
    - layout
    - graph-visualization
    - orthogonal-layout
    - 2D
summary: HOLA automatically lays out graphs in a 2D orthogonal view that maximizes human readability, improving interpretation and speed of parsing.
---

HOLA is an automated orthogonal graph layout engine that is design to mimic the complex high-level choices made by humans when organizing diagrams of charts with right-angle edges.

It's interesting to mimic human-driven layout of graphs because of the informed decisions humans make when designing these visualizations: Relationships between nodes — dependencies, ownerships, predecessors — can be very complex, and the visualization of the graph can be crucial to parsing the meaning of its contents.

Kieffer et al here propose a Human-like Orthogonal Network Layout engine, or _HOLA_, which is designed to make graphs more human-interpretable by making them more "human-designed" even when laid out by a machine.

They accomplish this by first considering what humans _like_ about human-designed graphs. This includes features like non-crossing edges (maximizing "planarity", first done in the 80's by an algorithm called _Topology-Shape-Metrics_ (TSM), still used today), as well as proximity of neighbors and distance of less related nodes.

Using a variety of human designs as a basis for training, the HOLA system makes a few improvements over existing systems: First, it decomposes a graph into "core" and "tree" subcomponents. Then it lays out the core, using a stress-minimization function. Then trees are added, preferring "tree outsideness" as much as possible (trees should be _inside_ loops as rarely as possible). Then the full network is balanced again using stress-minimization and "opportunistic alignment" to optimize for readability and human preference.

The authors found that human subjects, when asked to perform tasks like "shortest-path," performed better with HOLA-designed graphs than other existing state-of-the-art layout engines'. HOLA has a comparable runtime to other state-of-the-art layout engines.
