---
layout: post
title: "Live birth in the Devonian period"
byline: Long et al
doi: "10.1038/nature06966"
tags:
    - Devonian
    - paleontology
    - 3D
    - fossil
    - fish
    - birth
    - viviparity
    - Gogo-formation
summary: This Materpiscis attenboroughi holotype is the first known evidence of vertebrate live birth, moving the earliest-known live birth back by 200 million years.
---

The Gogo Formation in Western Australia is a particularly well-preserved Devonian-era shallow-water reef: The site is notable for its consistent preservation of three-dimensional, soft tissue in its limestone. The limestone can be dissolved with acetic acid, leaving the 3D fossil behind.

_Materpiscis attenboroughi_ is one animal discovered at the Gogo Formation using this method. _M. attenboroughi_ is a ptyctodontid placoderm — an "armored fish" whose lineage has since gone extinct. This fossil is remarkable in that a smaller fossilized animal was found inside the _M. attenboroughi_: Long et al discovered that this smaller animal was in fact an embryonic offspring.

At the time of its discovery, this made _M. attenboroughi_ — alive in the Devonian period 380 million years ago — the oldest known instance of viviparity in the vertebrate family tree.

This discovery holds such importantance because it teaches us two important things about vertebrate evolution: First, it changes our understanding of when live birth arose as a vertebrate trait by hundreds of millions of years: This discovery is a paradigm shift in the history of viviparity. Second, it demonstrates that the single fish remained in utero until it was fully formed and likely able to fend for itself: This means that the offspring likely required minimal care and attention after birth.
