---
layout: post
title: "An exceptional Devonian fish from Australia sheds light on tetrapod origins"
byline: Long et al
doi: "10.1038/nature05243"
tags:
    - fossil
    - paleontology
    - Devonian
    - fish
    - tetrapod
    - evolution
    - vertebrate
    - phylogeny
    - x-ray-tomography
    - x-ray
    - Gogo-formation
    - preservation
    - tetrapodomorph
    - pectoral-limb
    - spiracle
summary: The Gogonasus specimen found in Australia in 2006 begins to close the gap between fishes and amphibians like Tiktaalik.
---

I've read a few papers by paleontologist John Long before ([#109](http://blog.jordan.matelsky.com/365papers/109/), [#126](http://blog.jordan.matelsky.com/365papers/126/)) and, much like these other papers, this paper made big waves.

The species presented in this research, _Gogonasus_, took the crown for the most tetrapodomorphic fish discovered to date, helping to close the fossil-record gap between the fully aquatic fishes of the Devonian and the late-Devonian tetrapod-like (and perhaps more famous) _Tiktaalik_.

One particular, conspicuous feature is the shape and orientation of the spiracles, or respiratory holes in the skull. These wide spiracles — along with a complex internal spiracular architecture — are absent from "earlier" animals like _Eusthenopteron_. These spiracles are the evolutionary precursors to devoted external respiratory organs, and originally opened directly into the mouth. (They filled with water in these animals — they are not yet for air-breathing respiration this early in the evolutionary progression.)

This specimen, from the Gogo Formation in Australia, was also the only known case of full preservation of a tetrapodomorph pectoral limb, which shed a lot of light on the evolutionary pathway between the aquatic and the amphibious. The fin showed specializations that lean away from finlike bone structure in favor of a stouter, more articulated structure. This new structure in _Gogonasus_ is the most closely related to the structure seen in the limb of _Tiktaalik_.

Though there is still a great deal to be learned about the transition from water to air, _Gogonasus_ begins to tell the story of our transition from sea to land.
