---
layout: post
title: "Multiple Lines of Evidence Indicate That Gliotransmission Does Not Occur under Physiological Conditions"
byline: "Fiacco & McCarthy"
doi: "10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0016-17.2017"
tags:
    - neuroscience
    - neurotransmission
    - calcium
    - dual-perspectives
    - gliotransmission
    - astrocytes
    - glia
    - peer-review
summary: In this part of the Dual Perspectives series, it is argued that glia do not take part in the calcium-mediated release of neurotransmitters in order to signal information to neurons.
---

This paper is a neuroscience paper, though it doesn't focus on neurons: Instead, this paper looks at the _other_ white meat: Glial cells.

Gliotransmission is a bit of an open question in neuroscience: Do glia release neurotransmitters in response to chemical or electrical stimuli? And, if so, is this an endogenous response, or is it a result of the experimental environment?

_The Journal of Neuroscience_ publishes "Dual Perspectives" — two papers that seemingly conflict, despite both relying on existing, peer-reviewed research. This paper is one side of one such pair: I'll read the other [tomorrow](http://blog.jordan.matelsky.com/365papers/174/). (That link won't work until February 10, 2018!)

Fiacco & McCarthy argue that gliotransmission _does not occur_ under physiological conditions. That last clause is important: They agree that gliotransmission can be _induced_ under laboratory settings or with pharmacological agents, but they maintain that _healthy tissue_ in an intact brain does not experience gliotransmission.

There are a few lines of evidence that suggest that gliotransmision doesn't occur in healthy brain tissue, and the authors reference a few existing papers that either induce gliotransmission using means not found in the brain — such as mechanical stimulation — or other work which demonstrates that astrocyte Ca<sup>2+</sup> waves, one commonly cited indication that astrocytes use calcium ion signals for neurotransmission, do not propagate _between_ neurons in healthy forebrain, and instead simply remain within a single cell.

One of the coolest parts of reading this article was getting to see the "Response from Dual Perspectives Companion Authors" section at the end, where [Savtchouk and Volterra]((http://blog.jordan.matelsky.com/365papers/174/)) contest these findings, which has the convenient byproduct of reviewing the findings of the paper in very succinct terms.
