---
layout: post
title: "Transductive Adversarial Networks (TAN)"
byline: "Sean Rowan"
arxiv: "1802.02798"
tags:
    - neural-network
    - adversarial
    - TAN
    - unlabelled-data
    - MNIST
    - SVHN
    - drug-interaction
summary: Transductive adversarial networks enable training on labelled data in one domain and applying the model to unlabelled data in another domain, improving the feasibility of machine learning in restricted data ecosystems.
---

Oh man — my dude Sean Rowan is killing it.

In this paper, he demonstrates a novel adversarial network architecture called a _Transductive Adversarial Network_, or a TAN.

TANs address the common problem of having large amounts of in-domain unlabelled data alongside labelled but out-of-domain data. The canonical example is that of the MNIST digits dataset alongside the Google Street View House Numbers (SVHN) dataset: Using the MNIST image inputs and labels, it is possible to "link" the MNIST vectorization to a SVHN vectorization in order to classify SVHN inputs.

This toy example elucidates more nuanced uses of the TAN architecture: Rowan gives another example of drug interactions. Naturally, arbitrary human drug-rug interactions are difficult (or at least immoral) to test _in-vivo_. But by measuring drug interactions in a yeast culture and cross-training this on the human drug interactions, it is possible (theoretically) to improve human drug trials without more human pharmaceutical tests.

TAN differs from the preexisting $\Delta$-GAN architecture in one fundamental way: Whereas $\Delta$-GANs require matching inputs and labels in both source and target domains, TANS require only source domain labels alongside a marginalized label/vector distribution in the target domain. This makes TANs a more viable solution for more restrictive tasks (such as human drug trials).

Oh and also Sean rocks and [all of the code is available open-source on GitHub](https://github.com/sean-rowan/tan).

I am very seriously geeking out about this research.
