---
layout: post
title: "BB-Graph: A New Subgraph Isomorphism Algorithm for Efficiently Querying Big Graph Databases"
byline: "Asiler & Yazıcı"
arxiv: "1706.06654"
tags:
    - graph-theory
    - subgraph
    - graph-isomorphism
    - np-hard
    - subisomorphism
    - graphQL
    - neo4j
    - motif
    - iterative
    - query
    - graph-search
summary: BB-Graph is a new subisomorphism search algorithm that improves upon GraphQL and Cypher implementations.
---

The subgraph isomorphism problem — determining where (if anywhere) a graph can be embedded in another larger graph — is an extremely common applied graph theory task. But it is also unfortunately a very computationally expensive task (NP hard, in fact) and the current state-of-the-art solutions still take a great deal of time to run even on pretty serious hardware.

Although it's impossible (assuming P≠NP) to reduce the time-complexity of this algorithm much further, even very small improvements to the efficiency of graph-matching can have enormous impact.

That's why the authors — not content with existing systems like GraphQL or Cypher (Neo4j's implementation) — wrote BB-Graph.

Most subisomorphism algorithms in use today start by identifying a large set of candidate "seed" nodes in the graph, and the begin filtering by checking each node as a candidate in the subgraph.

This filtering step is crucial: The wall-clock runtime of the algorithm is superlinear with regards to this count.

BB-Graph uses this same "branch-and-bound" technique, but further reduces the start-node count by using some cleverer filters. And because this algorithm supports backtracking — the ability to establish a 'dead end' when iteratively querying for a subgraph and double back to an earlier decision point — it requires dramatically less memory than other methods as well.

The runtime of BB-Graph is still $O(|V_G| + |V_Q| + |E_Q| × max(deg_G))$ where $G = <V, E>$ is the "large" graph and $Q = <V,E>$ is the query graph (and $deg_G$ is the map of degree of nodes in graph $G$), but this means that it has consistently shorter runtimes than Cypher and GraphQL in almost all tested cases (and comparable performance in the other cases).
