---
layout: post
title: "Deep Learning based Retinal OCT Segmentation"
byline: Pekala et al
arxiv: "1801.09749v1"
tags:
    - OCT
    - retina
    - eye
    - optics
    - deep-learning
    - machine-learning
    - CNN
    - FCN
    - "group:apl"
summary: This automated segmentation approach to OCT retina imagery uses a fully connected convolutional neura network to improve upon existing state of the art algorithms.
---

Another paper with authors in my group at APL! We do cool things.

[I've written before about OCT](http://blog.jordan.matelsky.com/365papers/tag/#OCT), and the difficulties of automatically segmenting these sometimes _very_ noisy images.

But APL fixed all of our problems!

Using OCT images from a public dataset, the researchers trained a fully convolutional neural network on two experts' annotations. By asking two experts to annotate, it's possible to determine the inter-operator agreement, or how close two humans would get given the task we're giving to the net. In some sense, this gives us a task "difficulty" measure which comes in handy when determining if a model is _good_, or just very overfit.

It's important to note that the images used in this work are a mix of diseased-state and healthy controls. This is important because correctly determining the layer boundaries between retinal layers in a _healthy_ individual is a very different task than doing the same in an individual with a retinopathy.

The results? This automatic segmentation often outperforms the current state-of-the-art, and in some cases even outperforms expected human performance.

Though it's a bit premature to deploy this work to a clinical setting, this means that research OCT work requires dramatically less human ground-truthing than before, because this method performs comparably with a trained human, and likely always better than an untrained human.
