---
layout: post
title: "Axonal synapse sorting in medial entorhinal cortex"
byline: Schmidt et al
doi: "10.1038/nature24005"
tags:
    - entorhinal-cortex
    - MEC
    - synapse-sorting
    - webknossos
    - connectome
    - connectomics
    - EM
    - electron-microscopy
    - graphs
    - mouse
summary: Axons in mouse medial entorhinal cortex synapse onto inhibitory targets "sooner" along the length of the axon than onto excitatory targets, suggesting a complex signal-processing circuit.
---

In my opinion, the biggest challenge in visualizing neural microcircuitry is being able to wrap your head around the enormous density of the data: A single millimeter can hold hundreds of thousands of neurites, and probably hundreds of millions (or more!) of synapses. Ignoring a single voxel can have huge implications when considering the resultant connectome.

One of the most surreal things I've ever done is "flown" through dense neuropil using [WebKnossos](https://webknossos.org), a tool developed at the Max Planck Institute for Brain Research in Germany. You can watch Flight Mode [on YouTube here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LIljwJUjiAI). In short, it puts you in a (slightly distorted) cavity in the data, and warps the data as you glide through it so that you never feel claustrophobic.

Today's paper uses a team of 24 tracers — armed with WebKnossos — to understand the patterns of connectivity between neurons in medial entorhinal cortex (MEC). From this interrogation of a few micrometers of mouse cortex, Schmidt et al find a few interesting patterns:

First, excitatory-excitatory connections between neurons in MEC are rare. Instead, inhibitory interneurons likely act as a signal aggregator or filter. This is substantiated by prior electrical recording work.

Second, and more central to the "lesson" of this paper: Synapses self-sort along the length of neurites in MEC. In other words, axons' inhibitory targets tend to be closer to the soma, whereas excitatory targets tend to be further away. The _overall spatial distribution_ of excitatory or inhibitory synapses is roughly the same; so it is clear that this is not a function of the geometry of the sample, but rather a connectivity pattern common to cells in this brain region.

The authors dub this pattern _Path-length-dependent axonal synapse sorting_, or PLASS. They hypothesize some possible wiring diagrams for the PLASS circuitry, and demonstrate how PLASS might be a mechanism for tuning spike timing.
