---
layout: post
title: "A carbon nanotube tape for serial-section electron microscopy of brain ultrastructure"
byline: Kubota et al
doi: "10.1038/s41467-017-02768-7"
tags:
    - neuroscience
    - Kapton
    - carbon-nanotubes
    - CNT
    - tape
    - serial-section-EM
    - EM
    - imaging
    - materials
summary: Carbon nanotubes form a better substrate for serial-section electon microscopy than the conventional Kapton tape.
---

Up until this point, I've only read one paper about carbon nanotubes, and it was referring to [spider silk](http://blog.jordan.matelsky.com/365papers/100/). (If you didn't read that one.... you should. Not only was it my 100th post, but it was also something that sounded like a not real thing.)

Something that I haven't discussed in my [many previous posts about electron-microscopy connectomics](http://blog.jordan.matelsky.com/365papers/tag/#connectome) is the importance of the tape used to image the brain: The tape used for serial-section EM is conventionally carbon-coated (cc) Kapton tape, which, as far as I'm concerned, is already a supermaterial.

But it doesn't have a particularly robust surface, and suffers from scratches, high resistance, and tears. If only we knew of a technology that formed strong, rigid, ultrathin, low-resistance sheets!

Aha! Enter carbon nanotubes (CNT). CNTs are highly hydrophilic, so a tape made from CNTs (which has been plasma-treated to increase hydrophily) permits far less wrinkling in the imaged tissue than Kapton tape. Moreover, it doesn't dramatically affect image resolution or contrast, which makes it a perfect stand-in replacement for conventional tapes.

The one large shortcoming is still the cost of manufacture, but I believe that this won't be a problem for long, in light of recent technological improvements.
