---
layout: post
title: "The Neuronal Gene Arc Encodes a Repurposed Retrotransposon Gag Protein that Mediates Intercellular RNA Transfer"
byline: "Pastuzyn et al"
doi: "10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.024"
tags:
    - neuroscience
    - virus
    - retrovirus
    - mRNA
    - capsid
summary: Neurons can create capsid-like structures that enable them to send mRNA directly to neighboring cells, in a type of virus-like communication.
---

_The story so far..._

Retroviruses (e.g HIV) reproduce by entering target cells and inducing the target cell to translate the viral DNA to form new baby viruses.

_Meanwhile..._

The _Arc_ gene is known to be partially responsible for neuroplasticity and memory formation in human brains, and mutations to this gene can possibly result in neurodevelopmental disorders. But for years it has been unclear what _Arc_ is really doing.

_Until one day..._

Pastuzyn et al explored the role of endogenous _Arc_ proteins and found that it appears that _Arc_ is structurally similar to retroviral, "virus-like" proteins: In fact, _Arc_ proteins appear to be able to form capsids — mini-capsules of proteins that enable _Arc_ to transit across the cellular membrane of neurons. These structures look super similar to retroviral capsid functional domains, which suggests that _Arc_ arrived in the human genome as a result of viral infection.

Meanwhile: The big take-home lesson of this paper is that RNA is a required component in this _Arc_ capsid-based export process. So we know three things: _Arc_ forms capsids; RNA exists inside of those capsids; these capsids are absorbed by neighboring cells.

From this, we learn a surprising fact about the nervous system: Apparently, CNS cells are able to "donate" mRNA stretches to other cells in the vicinity.

This is extremely interesting, but also perhaps unsurprising: If cells can receive mRNA from their neighbors, it's a good way to exchange information about the surrounding environment, or to receive feedback even if there is no direct synapse to allow the two neurons to communicate electrochemically.
