---
layout: post
title: "Evidence of a plume on Europa from Galileo magnetic and plasma wave signatures"
byline: Jia et al
doi: "10.1038/s41550-018-0450-z"
tags:
    - jupiter
    - moon
    - europa
    - plume
    - water
    - astronomy
    - space
summary: New analyses of decade-old data from the Galileo mission around Jupiter suggest that the space probe passed through a plume of Europa.
---

On September 21, 2003, the _Galileo_ spacecraft, which had been studying Jupiter for eight years, plummeted into the Jovian atmosphere, and that was the end of the mission.

HA JUST KIDDING; ¡SCIENCE!

Galileo continuously transmitted data back to Earth until it was physically incapable of doing so, and that dataset is still largely unexplored.

The idea that Europa — a moon of Jupiter — has oceans underneath its icy surface — continues to fascinate researchers. It has been widely thought that another probe will need to arrive at Europa in order to definitely decide if the moon is releasing "plumes" — sure evidence that the moon contains liquid water. (Here's [a video of a lecture](https://youtu.be/gshHYyS7bHI?t=3714) I attended at the Space Telescope Science Institute, where I had the opportunity to ask a question of expert Dr. Susana Deustua.)

But it turns out that another probe — still welcome — is perhaps unnecessary, as Galileo's decade-old data is still revealing new truths about this moon. Galileo passed within 400km of Europa; close enough, it turns out, to experience dramatic changes in recordings from magnetometers and plasma wave spectrometers: These changes coincide with our expectations for plumes, which suggest evidence of planet-wide oceans underneath the icy crust.

This is, as scientists say, "crazy awesome."
