---
layout: post
title: "Content-Aware Image Restoration: Pushing the Limits of Fluorescence Microscopy"
byline: Weigert et al
doi: "10.1101/236463"
tags:
    - fluorescence
    - microscopy
    - image-processing
    - computer-vision
    - deep-learning
summary: The CARE network is a neural network that is able to supersample light-microscopy fluorescence images in order to dramatically refine the spatial and temporal resolution of the imagery while using a tiny fraction of the photon exposure required for conventional methods.
---

One common imaging modality is fluorescence microscopy, a technique that relies on the transmission of visible light to record the structure of function of a biological tissue. A pitfall of this method is the sensitivity of tissue to significant photon exposure; this technique requires a slight heating of the subject, and suffers from low spatial and temporal resolution.

This very exciting paper demonstrates that you _don't need to shower the sample with photons_; with a tiny fraction of the amount of light, this process, which uses machine-learning to super-sample the results, results in images that surpass even the ideal best-case limitations of the microscope hardware.

The team does this by training a computer vision neural network on a large amount of higher-resolution data of the same or a similar sample. This is used by the _Content Aware REestoration_ (CARE) network to increase the SNR of lower-fidelity data. Conventional methods use basic denoising that ignores the structure of the data; it is hoped that the CARE network takes advantage of these biological priors in order to enrich the dataset without sacrificing biofidelity.

I highly recommend readng this paper at least for its figures. The results are pretty astonishing, and appear to refine some details that would otherwise be lost for analysis. I do wonder how much of this is fully [hallucinated](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DeepDream) rather than an actual function of the data; it appears to my eyes to be producing true, biofidelic results, and on artificially subsampled datasets, the algorithm performed very well.

I'm looking forward to trying this code out, since it's [on its way to being available for public use](https://github.com/mpicbg-csbd/CSBDeep).
