---
layout: post
title: "The Only Known Jawed Vertebrate with Four Eyes and the Bauplan of the Pineal Complex"
byline: Smith et al
doi: "10.1016/j.cub.2018.02.021"
tags:
    - brain
    - neuroscience
    - vertebrates
    - eye
    - vision
    - circadian-rhythms
    - photoreceptor
    - pineal
    - parapineal
    - skull
    - foramen
    - ipRGC
summary: The first ever known case of a vertebrate with four 'eyes' changes the evolutionary model of the pineal organ.
---

So here's something I didn't know about: Many types of lizards have a "third eye" — the _pineal organ_, which sits at the top of the head (unicorn-horn position) and acts as a basic photoreceptor which aids the animal in keeping track of circadian rhythms and keeping tabs on which way is _up_. This organ can't see shape or color, but can detect light.

_Saniwa ensidens_ is a distant extinct relative of the modern monitor. Unlike all other known vertebrates, _S. ensidens_ had a _fourth_ eye — a parapineal — right in front of its pineal.

The skull tissue surrounding these fossilized foramina was very well preserved: Well enough preserved, at least, to definitively confirm that the skull had two distinct and discrete foramina, and not simply a crack or hole due to age or weathering.

So what does it mean to find this specimen?

The presence of both parapineal and pineal organs in this front-to-back organization changes the way evolutionary biologists understood the development of this organ (and as a result, the relationship between the disappearance of the pineal and the evolution of a more powerful or higher resolution eye in certain animals like birds and mammals). For a long time, the "classical" model proposed that these two foramina slowly converged on the top of the head, drifting from an ancient bilateral (i.e. a second pair of eyes) structure. Instead, it's now clear that these structures evolved centered on the skull.

This has implications for the introduction of blue opsins into the retina — and perhaps ipRGCs in general — in lieu of blue opsin expression taking place predominantly in a _third eye_.
