---
layout: post
title: "A single spectrum of neuronal identities across thalamus"
byline: Phillips & Schulmann et al
doi: "10.1101/241315"
tags:
    - neuroscience
    - transcriptome
    - circuit
    - thalamus
    - cortex
    - projection
    - mouse
    - "group:janelia"
summary: The thalamus acts as a filtering and processing step in the pipeline of sensory information entering cortex.
---

The thalamus acts as the first stop in the brain for sensory signals, projecting its own neurites outward into cortex. Though we have known for a long time that the thalamus performs this relaying function, it wasn't well-understood what the thalamus did beyond act as a switchboard (which is such a delightfully antiquated term itself that it shows you the last time the 'canonical models' were defined).

To shed light on this question, Phillips & Schulmann et al generated a "near-comprehensive" genetic transcriptome of thalamic neurons.  This transcriptome revealed three families of thalamic neuron profiles, "_primary_," "_secondary_," and "_tertiary_," with each profile occupying its own region of thalamus along the ear-to-ear axis (with the intermediate cells exhibiting signs of both profiles).

This differentiation is not solely the result of different thalamic mechanisms for different sensory modalities: That is, the authors controlled for the cortical targets of the thalamic neurons and still discovered genetic differences between the profiles.

The _primary_ neuron profile was most commonly associated with fast firing rates (coding for channels with high-speed kinetics). From this, it became clear that action potential width widened as you progress from _primary_ to _tertiary_.

Each of these profiles project to a particular region or set of regions of cortex, suggesting that thalamus is acting more like a first layer of filtering than a relay. This makes sense based upon the action potential width measure alone, because this would provide the equivalent of a high-pass, low-pass, and the combination of both with regard to the Nyquist frequency of a stimulus.
