---
layout: post
title: "The eardrums move when the eyes move: A multisensory effect on the mechanics of hearing"
byline: Gruters et al
doi: "10.1073/pnas.1717948115"
tags:
    - eardrums
    - ears
    - eye
    - hearing
    - neuroscience
summary: When some primates and humans move their eyes to fixate on a new location in space, the eardrums also move, adjusting in order to better resolve the origin of sounds and sights.
---

It's well established that visual information under scrutiny by primate brains affects the auditory processing of the same cues: Changing what a primate sees can change what he or she hears. In general, it's believed that this adjustment takes place in the brain.

But this paper demonstrates that middle ear muscles — the _stapedius_ and _tensor tympani_ — adjust the position and orientation of the eardrum itself in response to the motion of the eyes. These motions, dubbed "eye-movement-related eardrum oscillations" or EMREOs, are detected by placing a small, hyper-sensitive microphones in the ear canal and listening for the quiet vibrations that indicate a movement of this miniscule musculature.

The authors found that even in the absence of sounds, the eardrum musculature was manipulated. And when this was compared to eye motion (saccades), it became clear that these motions corresponded _directly_ to the motions of the eyes. (The researchesr were able to establish this by measuring the positions of the eyes of monkeys and humans in response to click stimuli or light stimuli.)

These motions are really interesting because it means that there is a relationship between the auditory and visual systems _prior_ to cortex: Somehow, information is journeying from sensory cortex _back out_ to the sensory organs themselves.

I imagine that these feedback systems enable higher-fidelity spatial acuity when trying to locate the origin of a stimulus in 3D space. But this immensely complicated system is fascinating: I wonder when in the evolutionary chain this began to arise.
