---
layout: post
title: Comparative Analysis of Gene Expression for Convergent Evolution of Camera Eye Between Octopus and Human
byline: Ogura et al
doi: 10.1101/gr.2268104
tags:
    - octopus
    - retina
    - neuroscience
    - evolution
    - vision
summary: A genome-wide study can start to explain why octopus eyes are really similar to human eyes, even though the species split long before the evolution of the camera-eye.
---

Octopuses are amazing, and you should read [this book](http://symontgomery.com/soul-of-an-octopus/) by Sy Montgomery. (Thanks Gracie for suggesting it!)

One amazing thing that makes octopuses so amazing is their amazing eye biology. Their eyes are "camera-eyes" — just like humans'. But the human evolutionary lineage split from the octopus lineage during the Precambrian period, back when [we were still mostly-squishy swimming things](https://twitter.com/ofctimallen/status/897687107191414784), which means that human camera-eyes and octopus camera-eyes (and complex brains, for that matter!) arose independently.

One confounding factor is the _lack_ of a camera-eye in animals that are closer-related to humans than octopus, or more closely related to octopus than humans. For instance, no insects at all have a camera eye, even though octopus and humans are phylogenetically more distant. And some molluscs lack a camera eye even though they are very closely related to octopus and very unrelated to humans.

This paper takes a deep dive into the genetics of the camera-eye, and establishes that many of the genes responsible for constructing such a complex eye probably existed long before the eye itself existed. In that way, both of our branches of the Tree of Life had _access_ to these genes, but only some species, such as vertebrates and octopus (plus some other sorts of mollusc) wound up _using_ those genes (for still unknown reasons).

Not mentioned too much in this paper is [how dramatically _better-designed_ the octopus eye biology is than humans'](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Evolution_eye.svg): You're probably aware of the existence of the human retinal blind-spot, but octopus eyes don't have that flaw: Whereas human photoreceptors (the cells that actually receive the light) paradoxically point _backwards_, and receive light only after it passes through a thick layer of tissue, octopus photoreceptors point outward, and receive a direct light-source. This means their optic nerve lives _behind_ their retina, while human optic nerve fibers aggregate in _front_ of the retina and punch a hole directly through it (blind spot!) to reach the brain.
