---
layout: post
title: Cofields: a physically inspired approach to motion coordination
byline: Mamei et al
doi: 10.1109/MPRV.2004.1316820
tags:
    - autonomy
    - distributed
    - motion-coordination

---

_Co-Fields_, or "computational fields", are a proposed multi-dimensional navigation system to enable what the authors call the upcoming "pervasive mobility" of autonomous devices, but what the rest of us just call [IoT](https://twitter.com/internetofshit). You should click that link.

The paper is enjoyably non-technical, despite addressing some pretty technical topics (there are a few $\Sigma$s but they're mostly harmless). The main gist is this:

> To avoid making a single "agent" do too much work to compute the global state of a navigation space, broadcast a "field" (like an electric field) that the agent can use to hill-climb or gradient-descend to reach its goal.

That is, overlay real-world spaces with Co-fields so that autonomous agents simply run a basic formula to find their next action. Imagine attaching a very strong magnet to a wall of your room, and then glueing a cube of metal to your Roomba.

I don't think the authors spent enough time addressing the issues of local minima (or maxima, depending on your point of view): It seems like this sort of field would cause a lot of agents to get stuck in minima between the overlaid fields, unless the agent was modifying or (exploratively) overriding the global Co-fields as well.

That being said, it seems like a very powerful concept to implement in [Extremely Simple Agents](http://www.michaelcrichton.com/prey/), where, unlike the hefty desktop behind yerterday's MantisBot, processing-power is at a premium.

I could also see it becoming very useful for cases where individual agents don't have global information at all, or lack the resources to store/process global maps — for instance, where individual agents are simple explorers with low processing power, or where network sparsity necessitates radio-silence from agents.
